📝 PHP Language page rework (#2271)
platformsh/platformsh-docs: docs/src/languages/php/tuning.md

If more simultaneous requests are received than the number of workers, then some requests wait until worker processes are available.

The default worker count is set to a conservative default value.
To determine and set the optimal value for your app, see [PHP-FPM sizing](./fpm.md).

## OPcache preloading

OPcache preloading loads selected files into shared memory, making their content (functions, classes) globally available for requests.
It also removes the need to include these files later.
When OPcache is correctly configured, it can result in significant improvements to both CPU and memory usage.

Consult your framework's documentation to see
if there are recommendations for optimal preload configuration or ready-to-use preload scripts.

OPcache is only available on PHP 7.4+ and uses PHP-CGI.
If your PHP version doesn't support OPcache, this is a good reason to upgrade.

Note that the only way to clear the preload cache is by [restarting PHP-FPM](#restart-php-fpm).

### Enable OPcache

To enable preloading, add a variable that specifies a preload script:

```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
variables:
    php:
        opcache.preload: '<PRELOAD_SCRIPT>'
```

> The `opcache.preload` value is a file path relative to the [app root](../../create-apps/app-reference.md#root-directory).

Reviewer: Notice that here the variable includes the extension. That's why the statement about it being the file path works.

It may be any PHP script that calls `opcache_compile_file()`.

> The following example uses the `preload.php` file as preload script.

Reviewer: :clipboard:
```suggestion
The following example uses a `preload.php` file as the preload script.
```

This script loads all `.php` files in the `vendor` directory (and subdirectories):

```php {location="preload.php"}
<?php
$directory = new RecursiveDirectoryIterator(getenv('PLATFORM_APP_DIR') . '/vendor');
$iterator = new RecursiveIteratorIterator($directory);
$regex = new RegexIterator($iterator, '/^.+\.php$/i', RecursiveRegexIterator::GET_MATCH);

foreach ($regex as $key => $file) {
    // This is the important part!
    opcache_compile_file($file[0]);
}
```

### Configure OPcache

> OPcache needs to be tuned before production usage and can be configured [the same way as PHP](../php/_index.md#customize-php-settings).

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
OPcache needs to be tuned before production usage and can be configured the [same way as PHP](../php/_index.md#customize-php-settings).
```

   set a higher value for memory consumption.
7. Set `opcache.memory_consumption`.
   Note: The unit for `opcache.memory_consumption` is megabytes.

   An example configuration:

   ```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
   variables:
       php:
           'opcache.memory_consumption': 96
   ```

8. [Restart PHP-FPM](#restart-php-fpm) and make sure that OPcache works as expected by rerunning CacheTool.
9. Remove CacheTool by deleting the `cachetools.phar` file.

### Disable OPcache timestamp validation

By default, OPcache checks that the cached version of a file is always up to date.
This means that every time a cached file is used, OPcache compares it to the file on disk.
If that file has changed, it gets reloaded and re-cached.
This allows to support apps that generate compiled PHP code from user configuration.

If you know your code isn't going to change outside of a new deploy,
you can disable that check and get a small performance improvement.

Timestamp validation can be disabled by adding the following to your [app configuration](../../create-apps/_index.md):

```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
variables:
    php:

>         'opcache.validate_timestamps': 0

Reviewer: :question: I just realized the default is `On`. Is `0` really the best to oppose that?

```

When you have disabled OPcache timestamp validation,
you need to explicitly clear OPcache on deployment by [restarting PHP-FPM](#restart-php-fpm).

Note: If your app generates PHP code at runtime based on user configuration, don't disable timestamp validation.
Doing so would prevent updates to the generated code from being loaded.

## Restart PHP-FPM

To force a restart of PHP-FPM, run `sv restart app`.

To force a restart of PHP-FPM on every deployment, add the command to your [`deploy` hook](../../create-apps/hooks/hooks-comparison.md#deploy-hook).
To clear the cache when PHP-FPM is restarted, add the command to your [`start` command](../../create-apps/app-reference.md#web-commands).

## Optimize your code

To optimize your app, consider using a [profiler](../../increase-observability/integrate-observability/_index.md).
A profiler helps determine what slow spots can be found and addressed and helps improve performance.

> The web agency [Pixelant](https://www.pixelant.net/) has also published a [log analyzer tool for Platform.sh](https://github.com/pixelant/platformsh-analytics) that offers a better visualization of access logs to determine how much memory requests are using on average.

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
The web agency [Pixelant](https://www.pixelant.net/) has also published a [log analyzer tool for Platform.sh](https://github.com/pixelant/platformsh-analytics)
that offers a better visualization of access logs to determine how much memory requests are using on average.
```

It offers additional insights into the operation of your site and can suggest places to further optimize your configuration.
It also provides guidance on when it's time to increase your plan size.

> Note that this tool is maintained by a 3rd party, not by Platform.sh.

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
Note that this tool is maintained by a third party, not by Platform.sh.
```

If more simultaneous requests are received than the number of workers, then some requests wait until worker processes are available.

The default worker count is set to a conservative default value.
To determine and set the optimal value for your app, see [PHP-FPM sizing](./fpm.md).

## OPcache preloading

OPcache preloading loads selected files into shared memory, making their content (functions, classes) globally available for requests.
It also removes the need to include these files later.
When OPcache is correctly configured, it can result in significant improvements to both CPU and memory usage.

Caching should only be used on files where caching is meaningful.
Consult your framework's documentation to see
if there are recommendations for optimal preload configuration or ready-to-use preload scripts.

OPcache is only available on PHP 7.4+.
If you aren't using PHP 7.4, this is a good reason to upgrade.

Note that the only way to clear the preload cache is by [restarting PHP-FPM](#restart-php-fpm).

### Enable OPcache

To enable preloading add a variable that specifies a preload script:

```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
variables:
    php:

>         opcache.preload: 'preload.php'

Reviewer: I feel like the other way would have been clearer in examples, but not so important either way.

but that does mean you may need to take a few steps to ensure your site is running optimally.

The following recommendations are guidelines only.

> They're also listed in about the order to investigate them.

Reviewer: :clipboard: This is one case where I'd say `about` doesn't really work as a substitution for `approximately`.

```suggestion
They're also listed in approximately the order to investigate them.
```

## Upgrade to PHP 8

To make a PHP-based site run faster, the first step is to upgrade the PHP version.
Upgrading the PHP version might require changes to your app.
For more details and recommendations, see the [PHP migration guides](https://www.php.net/manual/en/migration80.php).

To change your PHP version, change the [`type` in your app configuration](../../create-apps/app-reference.md#example-configuration).

> Before merging to production, test the change on a branch and make sure that your application is working as expected.

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
Before merging to production, test the change on a branch and make sure that your app is working as expected.
```

If more simultaneous requests are received than the number of workers, then some requests wait until worker processes are available.

The default worker count is set to a conservative default value.
To determine and set the optimal value for your app, see [PHP-FPM sizing](./fpm.md).

## OPcache preloading

OPcache preloading loads selected files into shared memory, making their content (functions, classes) globally available for requests.
It also removes the need to include these files later.
When OPcache is correctly configured, it can result in significant improvements to both CPU and memory usage.

Consult your framework's documentation to see
if there are recommendations for optimal preload configuration or ready-to-use preload scripts.

OPcache is only available on PHP 7.4+ and uses PHP-CGI.
If your PHP version doesn't support OPcache, this is a good reason to upgrade.

Note that the only way to clear the preload cache is by [restarting PHP-FPM](#restart-php-fpm).

### Enable OPcache

To enable preloading, add a variable that specifies a preload script:

```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
variables:
    php:
        opcache.preload: '<PRELOAD_SCRIPT>'
```

> The `opcache.preload` value is a file path relative to the [app root](../../create-apps/app-reference.md#root-directory).

Reviewer: This kind of explanation might help in places above (like where there was `PATH_TO_FILE`

<?php
$directory = new RecursiveDirectoryIterator(getenv('PLATFORM_APP_DIR') . '/vendor');
$iterator = new RecursiveIteratorIterator($directory);
$regex = new RegexIterator($iterator, '/^.+\.php$/i', RecursiveRegexIterator::GET_MATCH);

foreach ($regex as $key => $file) {
    // This is the important part!
    opcache_compile_file($file[0]);
}
```

### Configure OPcache

OPcache needs to be tuned before production usage and can be configured [the same way as PHP](../php/_index.md#customize-the-php-settings).

{{< note >}}
Let the application run for a while before tuning OPcache
since the preload script may change some of the configuration.
{{< /note >}}

#### Set the maximum number of cached files

`opcache.max_accelerated_files` is the maximum number of files that OPcache can cache at once.
If this value is lower than the number of files in the app,
the cache starts [thrashing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thrashing_(computer_science)) and becomes less effective.

To determine the maximum number of files to cache:

1. Determine roughly how many `.php` files your app has by running this command from [your app root](../../create-apps/app-reference.md#root-directory):

>     ```bash
>     find . -type f -name '*.php' | wc -l
>     ```

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
````suggestion
   ```bash
   find . -type f -name '*.php' | wc -l
   ```
````

    Note that the returned valued is an approximation.
    Some apps have PHP code in files that don't end in `.php` or files that are generated at runtime.

2. Set `opcache.max_accelerated_files` to a value slightly higher than the returned number.
   PHP automatically rounds the value up to the next highest prime number.

>    An example configuration:

Reviewer: :nail_care:
```suggestion
An example configuration:
```

This is the outcome of the process, not just the step

>    ```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
>    variables:
>        php:
>            'opcache.max_accelerated_files': 22000
>    ```

Reviewer: :nail_care: 
````suggestion
```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
variables:
    php:
        'opcache.max_accelerated_files': 22000
```
````

#### Set memory consumption

`opcache.memory_consumption` is the total memory (in megabytes) that OPcache can use with FastCGI.
If the app uses more than this, the cache starts [thrashing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thrashing_(computer_science)) and becomes less effective.

Determining the optimal limit to memory consumption requires executing code via a web request to get adequate statistics.
[`CacheTool`](https://github.com/gordalina/cachetool) is an open-source tool to help you get the statistics.

To determine the total amount of memory to use:

1. Connect to the container via SSH using the [CLI](../../development/cli/_index.md)
   by running `platform ssh`.

> 2. Change to the `/tmp` directory with `cd /tmp` (or any other non-web-accessible writable directory).

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
2. Change to the `/tmp` directory with `cd /tmp` (you can use any non-web-accessible writable directory).
```

Reviewer: Or
```suggestion
2. Change to the `/tmp` directory (or any other non-web-accessible writable directory) with `cd /tmp`.
```

The point is the parenthetical should come next to what it modifies.

3. Download CacheTool with `curl -sLO https://github.com/gordalina/cachetool/releases/latest/download/cachetool.phar`.
4. Make CacheTool executable with `chmod +x cachetool.phar`.
5. Check the OPcache status for FastCGI commands.

   ```bash
   php cachetool.phar opcache:status --fcgi=$SOCKET
   ```

   The `--fcgi=$SOCKET` option ensures the PHP-FPM process on the server connects through the right socket.
6. Analyze the output to determine the optimal value for `opcache.memory_consumption`.

>     The most important values from CacheTool's output are:
> 
>     - `Memory used`
>     - `Memory free`
>     - `Oom restarts` (out of memory restarts)
>       If the value is different than 0, you don't have enough memory allocated to OPcache.
> 
>     If `Memory free` is too low or `Oom Restarts` too high,
>     set a higher value for memory consumption.

Reviewer: :clipboard: 
```suggestion
   The most important values from CacheTool's output are:

   - `Memory used`
   - `Memory free`
   - `Oom restarts` (out of memory restarts)
     If the value is different than 0, you don't have enough memory allocated to OPcache.

   If `Memory free` is too low or `Oom Restarts` too high,
   set a higher value for memory consumption.
```

```yaml {location=".platform.app.yaml"}
variables:
    php:
        'opcache.validate_timestamps': 0
```

When you have disabled OPcache timestamp validation,
you need to explicitly clear OPcache on deployment by restarting PHP-FPM.

Note: If your application generates PHP code at runtime based on user configuration, you can't disable the timestamp validation.
Doing so would prevent updates to the generated code from being loaded.

## Optimize your code

It's possible that your application is doing more work than it needs to.
Profiling and optimizing a PHP application is a much larger topic than fits here.
You can use [Blackfire.io](../../increase-observability/integrate-observability/blackfire.md)
on your project to determine what slow spots can be found and addressed.

The web agency [Pixelant](https://www.pixelant.net/) has published a [log analyzer tool for Platform.sh](https://github.com/pixelant/platformsh-analytics).

This tool works only for PHP scripts,
but offers good visualizations and insights into the operation of your site.

It suggests where to further optimize your configuration
and provides guidance on when to increase your plan size.

> Note that this tool is maintained by a 3rd party, not by Platform.sh.

Reviewer: :hammer_and_wrench: I would maybe get rid of this section. It doesn't seem to rise to the level of documentation (it's not even certain it works outside of macOS).
